wip: doc for color scales (#3021)
altair-viz/altair: doc/user_guide/color_usage.rst

            titleAngle=0,
            titleAlign="right",
            titleBaseline="middle",
        )    

        # determine color pallettes for different color deficiencies
        normal_vision = chart_normal_vision(data, h_l, w, expr_hex, my_y_axis, cr_l, no)
        green_blindness = chart_green_blindness(data, h_s, w, expr_hex, my_y_axis, cr_s, no)
        red_blindness = chart_red_blindness(data, h_s, w, expr_hex, my_y_axis, cr_s, no)
        monochrome = chart_grayscale(data, h_s, w, expr_hex, my_y_axis, cr_s, no)

        # determine which color pallettes to return
        if cvd and grayscale:
            chart_concat = (normal_vision & green_blindness & red_blindness & monochrome & color_scale)
        elif cvd and not grayscale:
            chart_concat = (normal_vision & green_blindness & red_blindness & color_scale)
        else:
            chart_concat = (normal_vision & color_scale)

        # set configuration on concatenated chart object
        if single:
            chart_concat = chart_concat.configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None)    
        return chart_concat

The basics of color selection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Color selection is an essential aspect of creating clear and informative
> visualizations of scientific data. To make the most effective choices,
> it's important to understand the basics of color perception and theory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Color selection is an essential aspect of creating clear and informative
data visualizations. To make the most effective color choices,
it's important to understand the basics of color perception and theory.
In this section we start by explaining colors as perceived with standard color vision
and proceed to discuss how common color vision deficiencies alter color perception.
```

Color perception and theory

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: Instead of starting with talking about how to define a path between two colors, what do you think about having a more data-centric explanation that explains the different scenarios for how color could be used with data? These would be varying the hue/color to represent categorical values and varying mainly luminance to represent change in a quantitative value (with two sub categories: sequential and diverging colormaps, both which should be perceptually uniform). Personally, I'm a fan of how the seaborn docs introduce this topic as it becomes really tangible how the concepts of color applies to data right across the bath. I think talking about categorical and numerical data also maps nicely to that these concepts are already used in channel encodings and maybe our categories would be `nominal` data on the one hand, and then `ordinal` and `quantitative` together (as discrete and continuous sequential (or diverging) color scales). What do you think?

The section you have is really interesting and I love that the color space plot is made directly in Altair, so I want to keep it as part of the "Sequential" subsection where we talk more about how these color palettes are defined.

Reviewer: I start my class on this with these three slides:

![image](https://github.com/altair-viz/altair/assets/4560057/16345a6f-60f0-4cc4-8184-50b40d85dff1)

![image](https://github.com/altair-viz/altair/assets/4560057/c47f1c10-0b4d-4553-aeca-8efed03cea5d)

![image](https://github.com/altair-viz/altair/assets/4560057/fb98e0a5-819a-4749-bd7f-aff50d2e83f9)

Reviewer: I also really like these from the mpl docs on what perceptually uniform looks like in terms of the lightness increase:

![image](https://github.com/altair-viz/altair/assets/4560057/7eac9e2f-dd09-4771-8464-09f6f498891a)

![image](https://github.com/altair-viz/altair/assets/4560057/f8aa7d81-5d89-4157-8ee6-ec84d3e14e55)

We will explain the basics using two colors, ``blue`` and ``orange``: 
 
.. altair-plot::
    :remove-code:

    percep_schemes = {
        "two_color": ['blue','orange']
    }    

>     plot_scheme("two_color", percep_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, method='hcl').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

Reviewer: In all the plots in this section, could we remove the "normal vision" label and only include it in the section that talks about different types of color vision? I think the blue and orange rectangles could look better if they were  made a bit smaller as well.

In the later plots, we might also want to consider calling it something like "Standard/reference/perfect color vision" instead of "normal". And likewise change "color blindness" to "color vision deficiencies" which is more descriptive of the partial loss in color vision that most people with this condition have (rather than a complete color blindness which is quite rare)

> Now, lets say we want to define a gradient between ``blue`` and ``orange``.
> That means we have to go gradually from ``blue`` to ``orange``. 
> The interpolation between colors can follow several methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, lets say we want to define a gradient between ``blue`` and ``orange``.
That means we have to gradually transition from ``blue`` to ``orange``,
which is also called an "interpolation" between the two colors.
```

Then after this I would have the paragraph that starts with "So what is the correct interpolation...", then show the color space plot, then show the ppaths and the corresponding sequential color schemes created by each path.

    (rect + line).configure_view(stroke=None)

In the color space are the trajectories of the blue/orange color
gradient overlayed based on the three interpolation methods
(``rgb``, ``hcl``, ``hcl-long``).
You can see that all interpolation methods chose a different route
in the color space. The "``rgb``" trajectory a direct route. The
``hcl`` trajectory is choosing a route on the bottom part of the space.
We now also understand why there is a ``-long`` suffix
in the interpolation method ``hcl-long``. 
The interpolation trajectory is indeed very ``long``.

The default interpolation between colors within Altair is ``hcl``. 
Dependening on your use-case you can choose another interpolation method,
for a complete list of interpolation options see :class:`ScaleInterpolateEnum`. 

Color-blind viewers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
   
Around 8% of men and 0.5% of women have some form of color vision deficiency.
To make sure your visualizations are accessible to all viewers, it's
important to choose colors that are distinguishable even for those with 
color vision deficiencies. By using colors that have a high degree of
contrast, you can create visualizations that are not only informative but

> also inclusive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also inclusive.
The default color schemes that are used in Altair are designed
to be effective both for people with and without color vision deficiencies,
and the same goes for many of the available color scheme options.
However,
there are still some available color schemes that are not well-designed for people 
with color vision deficiency, as we can see in the example below.
```

.. altair-plot::
    :hide-code:    
    :output: none

    color_vision_deficiency = {
        'redyellowblue': 9,
        'redyellowgreen' : 9
    }

.. list-table::
   :widths: 100
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Example
   * - **More friendly** diverging color scheme (``redyellowblue``). 
       This color scheme avoids using green colors, and instead uses red,
       yellow, and blue colors.

       .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         plot_scheme("redyellowblue", color_vision_deficiency, cvd=True, continuous=True)

   * - **Unfriendly** diverging color scale (``redyellowgreen``).
       The red and green colors are used to represent different ends of a spectrum, 
       but these two colors are not easy differentiated with some type of CVD.

       .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         plot_scheme("redyellowgreen", color_vision_deficiency, cvd=True, continuous=True)

Guidelines for using colors

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: Love this section! One rule I would add is to start thinking about breaking our chart up into many smaller subcharts (e.g. faceting) when we get to around 5-8 different categorical colors:

![image](https://github.com/altair-viz/altair/assets/4560057/17fd1c05-1a65-449c-846a-6b7f2e08f607)

         from vega_datasets import data
         
         source = data.iowa_electricity()
         
         alt.Chart(
            source, width=200, height=200
         ).mark_area().encode(
             x="year:T",
             y="net_generation:Q",
             color=alt.Color("source:N").legend(
                orient="bottom",
                direction="horizontal",
                columns=2
             )
         )

     - If you do not explain what your colors mean, people might be confused
       and not understand your visualization properly. 
       
       .. altair-plot::
         :hide-code:

         import altair as alt
         from vega_datasets import data
         
         source = data.iowa_electricity()
         
         alt.Chart(
            source, width=200, height=200
         ).mark_area().encode(
             x="year:T",
             y="net_generation:Q",
             color=alt.Color("source:N").legend(
                None
             )
         )

Color schemes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This sections presents the three primary color schemes used in data
visualization: sequential, diverging, and categorical. 

Sequential schemes

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: I think it is great that we are showing how each palette look for common color vision deficiencies here! I think it would also be great to include which ones are perceptually uniform, but maybe that is not possible? Or a small line chart / spark line maybe could work for the luminiosty? I also think that is nice that we show an example of the discrete version of the scheme, but maybe we could more clearly label that this is what it would look like for ordinal data (which I think is the main scenario where they would be used?)?

Reviewer: It also seems like the sequential multi-hue schemes (e.g. viridis) are missing?

Sequential schemes are best suited for data that has an inherent ordering,
such as data that varies from low to high, or over time. Examples of
sequential data include temperature or population density, where the
range of values is continuous and unbroken.

.. altair-plot::

>     :hide-code:    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :remove-code:    
```

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         alt.vconcat(
             plot_scheme("reds", seqs_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=True, single=False, top=True),
             plot_scheme("reds", seqs_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, single=False, bottom=True)
         ).configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None).resolve_scale(color='independent').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         oranges

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         alt.vconcat(
             plot_scheme("oranges", seqs_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=True, single=False, top=True),
             plot_scheme("oranges", seqs_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, single=False, bottom=True)
         ).configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None).resolve_scale(color='independent').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

Diverging schemes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Diverging schemes are best suited for data that varies above and below a
center point, such as positive and negative deviations from a mean.
Examples of diverging data include measures of deviation, such as
temperature anomalies or changes in sea level.

.. altair-plot::

>     :hide-code:    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :remove-code:    
```

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         redyellowgreen

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         alt.vconcat(
             plot_scheme("redyellowgreen", divg_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=True, single=False, top=True),
             plot_scheme("redyellowgreen", divg_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, single=False, bottom=True)
         ).configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None).resolve_scale(color='independent').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         spectral

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         alt.vconcat(
             plot_scheme("spectral", divg_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=True, single=False, top=True),
             plot_scheme("spectral", divg_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, single=False, bottom=True)
         ).configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None).resolve_scale(color='independent').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

Cyclical schemes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cyclical color schemes may be used to highlight periodic patterns in continuous data.
However, these schemes are not well suited to accurately convey value differences.

.. altair-plot::

>     :hide-code:    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :remove-code:    
```

    
         rainbow

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         alt.vconcat(
             plot_scheme("rainbow", cycl_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=True, single=False, top=True),
             plot_scheme("rainbow", cycl_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, single=False, bottom=True)
         ).configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None).resolve_scale(color='independent').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         sinebow

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         alt.vconcat(
             plot_scheme("sinebow", cycl_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=True, single=False, top=True),
             plot_scheme("sinebow", cycl_schemes, cvd=False, continuous=False, single=False, bottom=True)
         ).configure_concat(spacing=1).configure_view(stroke=None).resolve_scale(color='independent').configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

Categorical schemes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Categorical schemes are best suited for data that is unordered, such as
different species or categories. Examples of categorical data include
the types of flowers in a garden, or different political affiliations.

.. altair-plot::

>     :hide-code:    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :remove-code:    
```

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         set3

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         plot_scheme("set3", catg_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=False).configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         tableau10

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         plot_scheme("tableau10", catg_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=False).configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

   * - .. code-block:: none
    
         tableau20

     - .. altair-plot::
         :remove-code:

         plot_scheme("tableau20", catg_schemes, cvd=True, continuous=False).configure_scale(rectBandPaddingInner=0.1)

Palettes from other sources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This subsection focuses on pre-designed color palettes that can be
used in data visualization from other sources.

Here some color schemes from Paul Tol, https://personal.sron.nl/~pault/ which are picked as being:

- distinct for all people, including colour-blind readers
- distinct from black and white
- distinct on screen and paper
- matching well together

.. altair-plot::   
    :output: none

    tol_schemes = {

>         "tol_bright" : ['#4477AA', '#EE6677', '#228833', '#CCBB44', '#66CCEE', '#AA3377', '#BBBBBB'],

Reviewer: This might need some more explanation on how to use these custom palettes. Maybe the section could start with an intro of how to make your own palette (like what is in the color customization section right now) and then show some from this other source. Also, I am not familiar with Paul Tol, but maybe we can think about the presentation of his palettes so that it doesn't seem like the properties listed above are not true for the built-in altair color schemes, because in many cases they are.

.. altair-plot::

    import altair as alt
    from vega_datasets import data

    source = data.barley()

    base = alt.Chart(source).encode(
        x=alt.X('sum(yield):Q').stack('zero'),
        y=alt.Y('site:O').sort('-x'),
        text=alt.Text('sum(yield):Q', format='.0f')
    )

    bars = base.mark_bar().encode(color='sum(yield):Q')
    text = base.mark_text(align='right', dx=-3, color='black')

    bars + text

As you can see, when the bar becomes darker, the text overlay becomes less visible.

At this moment we can make use of the measured luminance to decide if the text overlay
should be colored ``black`` or ``white``.

.. altair-plot::

    import altair as alt
    from vega_datasets import data

    source = data.barley()

    base = alt.Chart(source).encode(
        x=alt.X('sum(yield):Q').stack('zero'),
        y=alt.Y('site:O').sort('-x'),
        text=alt.Text('sum(yield):Q', format='.0f')
    )

    bars = base.mark_bar(
        tooltip=alt.expr("luminance(scale('color', datum.sum_yield))")
    ).encode(
        color='sum(yield):Q'
    )

    text = base.mark_text(
        align='right', 
        dx=-3,

>         color=alt.expr("luminance(scale('color', datum.sum_yield)) > 0.5 ? 'black' : 'white'")
>     )
> 
>     bars + text
> 
> The lighter the bar, the higher the luminance. If the bar is light
> we like a text overlay that is black. The darker the bar, the lower
> the luminance. If the bar is dark, we like a text overlay that is white.
> 
> In the expression above we have written this as a predicate. The text
> appear ``black`` if the luminance is above ``0.5`` and ``white`` when
> the luminance is below ``0.5``. The luminance is computed using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        color=alt.expr("luminance(scale('color', datum.sum_yield)) > 0.408 ? 'black' : 'white'")
    )

    bars + text

The lighter the bar, the higher the luminance. If the bar is light
we like a text overlay that is black. The darker the bar, the lower
the luminance. If the bar is dark, we like a text overlay that is white.

In the expression above we have written this as a predicate. The text
appear ``black`` if the luminance is above ``0.408`` and ``white`` when
the luminance is below ``0.408``. The luminance is computed using the
```

This section is great! I love that expression can be used for this! The reason for the change I suggest here is to stay consistent with what is used in seaborn, which is also what I chose when adding this to the text of pandas heatmaps. We could add a note about this? (I was trying to look up the reason for picking this exact number in the first place, but based on [my comment here ](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/pull/21263/files#r193573758)I don't think I ever knew =) )
